Psychogeography: a beginner's guide. Unfold a street map of London, place a glass, rim down, anywhere on the map, and draw round its edge. Pick up the map, go out into the city, and walk the circle, keeping as close as you can to the curve. Record the experience as you go, in whatever medium you favour: film, photograph, manuscript, tape. Catch the textual run-off of the streets; the graffiti, the branded litter, the snatches of conversation. Cut for sign. Log the data-stream. Be alert to the happenstance of metaphors, watch for visual rhymes, coincidences, analogies, family resemblances, the changing moods of the street. Complete the circle, and the record ends. Walking makes for content; footage for footage" (Robert McFarlane, A road of own's own) 

This act of walking is an urban affair and in cities that are increasingly hostile to the pedestrian it inevitably becomes an act of subversion. 

psychogeography also demonstrates a playful sense of provocation and trickery...one of its further characteristics may be identified in the search for new ways of apprehending our urban environment. Psychogeography seeks to overcome the processes of 'banalisation' by which the everyday experience of our surroundings becomes one of drab monotony....a perception of the city as a site of mystery and seek to reveal the true nature that lies beneath the flux of the everyday 


the act of urban wandering, the spirit of political radicalism, allied to a playful sense of subversion and governed by an inquiry into the methods by which we can transform our relationship to the urban environment. This entire project is then further coloured by an engagement with the occult and is one that is as preoccupied with excavating the past as it is with recording the present.

Machen seeks out the strange...within our midst...a street, event or object capable of transforming the most mundane surroundings into something strange or sinister....called the Northwest Passage by de Quincey

the portrayal of the detached observer walking the streets in Poe's short story The Man of the Crowd...it is here that the crowd first comes to symbolize the changing nature of the modern city 

The predominant characteristics of psychogeographical ideas -- urban wandering, the imaginative reworking of the city, the otherwordly sense of spirit of place, the unexpected insighs and juxtapositions created by aimless drifting, the new ways of experiencing familiar surroundings 

Robinson Crusoe...provides a broad outline of a character who encapsulates the freedom and detachment of the wanderer, the resourcefulness of the adventurer and the amorality of the survivor...necessary for the urban wanderer walking unfamliar streets

the catastrophe...creates the characteristic sense of disorientation...the city is made strange, defamiliarised, as its inhabitants are granted a vision of the city as it might be, as heaven or hell

the transformation of the familiar landscapes of his own time and place into a transcendent image of the eternal city

the mental traveller who remakes the city in accordance with his own imagination is allied to the urban wanderer who drifts thru the city streets; the political radicalism that seeks to overthrow the established order the day is tempered by an awareness of the city as eternal and unchanging; and the use of antiquarian and occult symbolism reflects the precedence given to the subjective and the anti-rational over more systematic modes of thought

the origins of the...occult...both transforms the topography of the city into something strange and menacing and exposes a double life of privilege and despair lie in the city 

What about a tale of a man who lost his way; who became so entangled in some maze of imagination and speculation that the common, material ways of the world became of no significance to him? -- Arthur Machen, the London Adventure, or the Art of Wandering 

the aim is to utterly shun the familiar in favour of a deliberate attempt to lose onself amongs the overlooked quarters of the city

This conscious attempt to ignore the known aspects of the city in favour of an aimless wandering, driven solely by the force of the imagination, indicates...a hybrid figure in which writer and walker emerge.

[The city] becomes emblematic of the city as labyrinth, a darkly gothic vision in which the mundane reality of everyday life masks the eternal city that lies beneath 

The Surrealists provide an account of a new kind of wanderer, alive to the potential transformation of the city and engaged in those subversive and playful practices that were later to become the hallmark of the Situationists. Here, once again, the wanderer whose movements transform his surroundings provides a link with a lost tradition that reclaims the city as the site for political and aesthetic experimentation

As public spaces become private ones and the street is chocked with traffic, so walking is reduced to mere promenading, explorers becoming little more than window-shoppers. In the modern city the man of the crowd must adapt or perish.

The flaneur is a composite figure -- vagrant, detective, explorer, dandy and stroller -- yet, within these many and often contradictory roles, his predominant characteristsic is the way in which he makes the street his home and this is hist true legacy to psychogeography. Yet the history of the flaneur is one in which the cities that he inhabits are shown to be increasingly hostile to him, and he is ultimately evicted from the street and forced to seek a new environment elsewhere

the evolution of the urban wanderer in all his guises, from mental traveller and armchair wanderer to flaneur, vagrant and stalker

....the development of psychogeography as it mutates from detached observation to a more committed and involved practice engaged with its surroundings and increasingly determined to change them

discover the places that really have no reason to exist

Psychogeography: The study of the specific effects of the geographical environment, consciously organised or not, on the emotions and behaviour of individuals.

The city is made strange, defamiliarised, as its inhabitants are granted a vision of the city as it might be, as heaven or hell

This conscious attempt to ignore the known aspects of the city in favour of an aimless wandering, driven solely by the force of the imagination, indicates...a hybrid figure in which writer and walker emerge.

Derive: consists of drifting and deliberately trying to lose oneself in the city...the city had to be reinvented on a personal level, to be reconfigured along the lines of a new nomadic lifestyle.

Catch the textual run-off of the streets; the graffiti, the branded litter, the snatches of conversation. Cut for sign. Log the data-stream. Be alert to the happenstance of metaphors, watch for visual rhymes, coincidences, analogies, family resemblances, the changing moods of the street. Complete the circle, and the record ends. Walking makes for content; footage for footage

From the derive point of view cities have a psychological relief, with constant currents, fixed points and vortexes which strongly discourage entry into or exit from certain zones.

Constant contrasted today's utilitarianism to a future ludic society where the 'dynamic labyrinth' (a ever-shifting maze) would represent the paradigm of both architectural and social utopia....the citizens of New Babylon would roam freely within this radically decentred environment. No longer would architecture be the concrete manifestation of a controlling social order. the city would consist of a series of zones to move through rather than distinct places for permanent occupation.

I thought of a labyrinth of labyrinths, of one sinuous spreading labyrinth that would encompass the past and the future and in some way involve the stars. I felt myself, for an indefinite while, the abstract perceiver of the world. The vague, living countryside, the moon, the remains of the day did their work in me; so did the gently downward road, which forestalled all possibility of weariness. The evening was near, yet infinite.

Psychogeography also demonstrates a playful sense of provocation and trickery...one of its further characteristics may be identified in the search for new ways of apprehending our urban environment. Psychogeography seeks to overcome the processes of 'banalisation' by which the everyday experience of our surroundings becomes one of drab monotony....a perception of the city as a site of mystery and seek to reveal the true nature that lies beneath the flux of the everyday

the city had to be reinvented on a personal level, to be reconfigured along the lines of a new nomadic lifestyle.

Derive: consists of drifting and deliberately trying to lose oneself in the city.

In a derive one or more persons during a certain period drop their usual motives for movement and action, their relations, their work and leisure activities, and let themselves be drawn by the attractions of the terrain and the encounters they find there...From the derive point of view cities have a psychological relief, with constant currents, fixed points and vortexes which strongly discourage entry into or exit from certain zones.

Derive as a mode of experimental behaviour linked to the conditions of urban society: a technique of transient passage through varied ambiences. Also used to designate a specific period of continuous deriving.

Constant constrasted today's utilitarianism to a future ludic society where the 'dynamic labyrinth' (a ever-shifting maze) would represent the paradigm of both architectural and social utopia

The citizens of New Babylon would roam freely within this radically decentred environment. No longer would architecture be the concrete manifestation of a controlling social order. the city would consist of a series of zones to move through rather than distinct places for permanent occupation.