The quantitative and the linear are inseparable. A line and measure of time and a line and measure of life define survival: a succession of interchangeable instants. These lines are part of the ambigious geometry of Power (71)

"The quantitive and the linear are inseparable...the life we have now is broken up--a broken line" (75)

The system of commercial exchange has now come to govern all of people's everyday relations with themselves and with their fellows. Every aspect of public and private life is dominated by the quantitive. (71)

To the extent that individiduals accept Power and enable it to exist, Power applies its own measure to them: it reduces and standardizes them. What is the individual to an authrotiarian system? A point duly located in its perspective. A point that it recognizes, certainly, but recognizes only in mathematical terms, in terms of its exact position as plotted relative to x- and y-axes. (71)

ideology's essence is drawn from quantity: ideas reproduced again and again in time...and space (73)

what an immense quantity of oft-repeated lies can be swept away by a single burst of revolutionary poetry (74)

Time for us is a thread: from cradle to grave, from memories of the past to anticipations of the future, an endless survival strings out its succession of instants and hybrid presents, all gnawed at by the time that slips away and the time yet to come (75)

Power is the great city planner. It lets off survival in public and private parcels, buys up cleared lots cheap, and permits no construction that does not meet its standards. Its own constructions are designed to strip individuals of everything. Its monolithic style is the envy of its actual builder of cities, who ape it assiduosly as they replace the old mumbo-jumbo architecture of the sacred geometry with stockbroker belts, white-collar districts and workers' housing projects (76)

The reconstruction of life and the rebuilding of the world: the self-same quest (76).

Words lie at he frontier between the will to live and its repression (78)

People are far too unperturbed...by the way in which the world...assumes the forms of the prevailing metaphysics.

"My knowledge of the world exists effectively only from the moment when I transform the world." (80)

Power no longer protects the people; rather, it protects itself against each and every individual. A spontaneous creation of inhumanity by human agency, Power is now nothing more than an inhuman barrier to creativity. (81)

Whenever the total and immediate consummation of an action is deferred, Power is confirmed in its function of grand mediator. Spontaneous poetry, on the other hand, is antimediation par excellence (81).

Ideological hypnosis is replacing the bayonet (81).

Radical theory stems from the individual...gripping the masses through what is most creative in each person, through subjectivity, through the will to self-fulfilment. (83)

Ideological conditioning...is the technical manipulation of the inhuman, of the weight of things (83)

[ideological conditioning] turns human beings into objects with no meaning external to the Order in which they have their place. It assembles them in order to isolate them, making the crowd into a multiplicity of solitudes (83)


the conflict between humans and the element of inhumanity that humanity secretes--presides over the transformation of the world into human reality but also over its transmutation into metaphysical reality. Everything that human beings do and undo passes through the mediation of language. The semantic realm is one of the main battlefields in the struggle between the will to live and the spirit of submission (84)

Words are better servants of Power than human beings are users of words; words server Power more faithfully than most humans and more scrupulously than other mediations--space,time technology and so on. For all supersession depends on language and develops as a system of signs and symbols (84)

The repetition of familiar signs is the foundation of ideology. (84)

Nonetheless, people strive to use words and signs to complete their aborted actions. Because they do so, there is such a thing as poetic language: a language of lived experience which...is inseparable from the radical theory which grips the masses and becomes a material force (84)

No poetic sign is ever definitely comandeered by ideology (84)

The language that diverts radical actions, creative actions...from their fulfilment becomes antipoetry, which defines Power's linguistic function ,its information technology (84)

